What is operating system?

It is an interface between user application and system software.
It manages resources and provides services for efficient and secure execution of program.

Primary function:
Process management, Memory management, FS management, device management

Types:
Windows, MacOS, Linux, Unix, Android, iOS


What is program?

These are the set of instructions written in a programming language that intend to perform a specific task.


Multiprocessing
It refers to execution of multiple processes on a system with multiple cpu or cpu cores.
It aims to increase the system throughput and provides faster execution by distributing workload across multiple processes. 




What's the main purpose of an OS? What are the different types of OS?
The main purpose of an OS is to execute user programs and make it easier for users to understand and interact with computers as well as run applications. It is specially designed to ensure that the computer system performs better by managing all computational activities. It also manages computer memory, processes, and operation of all hardware and software.  Types of OS:
* Batched OS (Example: Payroll System, Transactions Process, etc.)
* Multi-Programmed OS (Example: Windows O/S, UNIX O/S, etc.)
* Timesharing OS (Example: Multics, etc.)
* Distributed OS (LOCUS, etc.)
* Real-Time OS (PSOS, VRTX, etc.)



What are the benefits of a multiprocessor system?
A Multiprocessor system is a type of system that includes two or more CPUs. It involves the processing of different computer programs at the same time mostly by a computer system with two or more CPUs that are sharing single memory.   Benefits:
* Such systems are used widely nowadays to improve performance in systems that are running multiple programs concurrently. 
* By increasing the number of processors, a greater number of tasks can be completed in unit time. 
* One also gets a considerable increase in throughput and is cost-effective also as all processors share the same resources.
* It simply improves the reliability of the computer system.




What is RAID structure in OS? What are the different levels of RAID configuration?
RAID (Redundant Arrays of Independent Disks) is a method used to store data on Multiple hard disks therefore it is considered as data storage virtualization technology that combines multiple hard disks. It simply balances data protection, system performance, storage space, etc. It is used to improve the overall performance and reliability of data storage. It also increases the storage capacity of the system and its main purpose is to achieve data redundancy to reduce data loss.   Different levels of RAID  Nowadays, RAID is available in various schemes or RAID level as given below:
￼
* RAID 0 - Non-redundant striping: This level is used to increase the performance of the server.
* RAID 1 - Mirroring and duplexing: This level is also known as disk mirroring and is considered the simplest way to implement fault tolerance.
* RAID 2 - Memory-style error-correcting codes: This level generally uses dedicated hamming code parity I.e., a liner form of error correction code.
* RAID 3 - Bit-interleaved Parity: This level requires a dedicated parity drive to store parity information.
* RAID 4 - Block-interleaved Parity: This level is similar to RAID 5 but the only difference is that this level confines all parity data to a single drive.
* RAID 5 - Block-interleaved distributed Parity: This level provides far better performance than disk mirroring and fault tolerance.
* RAID 6 - P+Q Redundancy: This level generally provides fault tolerance for two drive failures.

/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/level-of-RAID.png





What is a Pipe and when it is used?
The pipe is generally a connection among two or more processes that are interrelated to each other. It is a mechanism that is used for inter-process communication using message passing.  One can easily send information such as the output of one program process to another program process using a pipe. It can be used when two processes want to communicate one-way i.e., inter-process communication (IPC).




What is a bootstrap program in OS?
It is generally a program that initializes OS during startup i.e., first code that is executed whenever computer system startups. OS is loaded through a bootstrapping process or program commonly known as booting. Overall OS only depends on the bootstrap program to perform and work correctly. It is fully stored in boot blocks at a fixed location on the disk. It also locates the kernel and loads it into the main memory after which the program starts its execution.



Explain demand paging?
Demand paging is a method that loads pages into memory on demand. This method is mostly used in virtual memory. In this, a page is only brought into memory when a location on that particular page is referenced during execution. The following steps are generally followed:
* Attempt to access the page.
* If the page is valid (in memory) then continue processing instructions as normal.
* If a page is invalid then a page-fault trap occurs.
* Check if the memory reference is a valid reference to a location on secondary memory. If not, the process is terminated (illegal memory access). Otherwise, we have to page in the required page.
* Schedule disk operation to read the desired page into main memory.
* Restart the instruction that was interrupted by the operating system trap.



What do you mean by RTOS?
Real Time Operating System (RTOS) is an operating system that is used for real-time applications i.e., for those applications where data processing should be done in a fixed and small measure of time. It performs much better on tasks that are needed to be executed within a short time. It also takes care of execution, monitoring, and all-controlling processes. It also occupies less memory and consumes fewer resources. 


What do you mean by process synchronization?
Process synchronization is basically a way to coordinate processes that use shared resources or data. It is very much essential to ensure synchronized execution of cooperating processes so that will maintain data consistency. Its main purpose is to share resources without any interference using mutual exclusion. There are two types of process synchronization:
* Independent Process
* Cooperative Process



What is IPC? What are the different IPC mechanisms?
IPC (Interprocess Communication) is a mechanism that requires the use of resources like a memory that is shared between processes or threads. With IPC, OS allows different processes to communicate with each other. It is simply used for exchanging data between multiple threads in one or more programs or processes. In this mechanism, different processes can communicate with each other with the approval of the OS.
Different IPC Mechanisms:
* Pipes
* Message Queuing
* Semaphores
* Socket
* Shared Memory
* Signals


What do you mean by overlays in OS?
Overlays is basically a programming method that divides processes into pieces so that instructions that are important and need can be saved in memory. It does not need any type of support from the OS. It can run programs that are bigger in size than physical memory by only keeping only important data and instructions that can be needed at any given time. 




What is virtual memory?
It is a memory management technique feature of OS that creates the illusion to users of a very large (main) memory. It is simply space where a greater number of programs can be stored by themselves in the form of pages. It enables us to increase the use of physical memory by using a disk and also allows us to have memory protection. It can be managed in two common ways by OS i.e., paging and segmentation. It acts as temporary storage that can be used along with RAM for computer processes. 




What is thread in OS?
Thread is a path of execution that is composed of a program counter, thread id, stack, and set of registers within the process. It is a basic unit of CPU utilization that makes communication more effective and efficient, enables utilization of multiprocessor architectures to a greater scale and greater efficiency, and reduces the time required in context switching. It simply provides a way to improve and increase the performance of applications through parallelism. Threads are sometimes called lightweight processes because they have their own stack but can access shared data.   Multiple threads running in a process share: Address space, Heap, Static data, Code segments, File descriptors, Global variables, Child processes, Pending alarms, Signals, and signal handlers.   Each thread has its own: Program counter, Registers, Stack, and State.
￼
/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/process.png



What is a process? What are the different states of a process?
The process is basically a program that is currently under execution. The main function of an OS is to manage and handle all of these processes. When a program is loaded into the memory and it becomes a process, it can be divided into four sections ─ stack, heap, text, and data. There are two types of processes:
1. Operating System Processes
2. User Processes
￼

/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/states-of-process.png



What is Reentrancy?
Reentrant is simply a function in which various clients can use and shares a single copy of a program during a similar period. This concept is generally associated with OS code and does not deal with concurrency. It has two major functions:
* Program code cannot change or modify itself.
* Local data for every client process needs to be stored in different disks.



What is a Scheduling Algorithm? Name different types of scheduling algorithms.
A scheduling algorithm is a process that is used to improve efficiency by utilizing maximum CPU and providing minimum waiting time to tasks. It simply deals with the problem of deciding which of outstanding requests is to be allocated resources. Its main aim is to reduce resource starvation and to ensure fairness amongst parties that are utilizing the resources. In simple words, it is used to allocate resources among various competing tasks.   Types of Scheduling Algorithm  There are different types of scheduling algorithms as given below:
￼
/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/scheduling-algorithms.png



What is the difference between paging and segmentation?
Paging: It is generally a memory management technique that allows OS to retrieve processes from secondary storage into main memory. It is a non-contiguous allocation technique that divides each process in the form of pages.  Segmentation: It is generally a memory management technique that divides processes into modules and parts of different sizes. These parts and modules are known as segments that can be allocated to process. 



What is thrashing in OS?
It is generally a situation where the CPU performs less productive work and more swapping or paging work. It spends more time swapping or paging activities rather than its execution. By evaluating the level of CPU utilization, a system can detect thrashing. It occurs when the process does not have enough pages due to which the page-fault rate is increased. It inhibits much application-level processing that causes computer performance to degrade or collapse. 


What is the main objective of multiprogramming?
It refers to the ability to execute or perform more than one program on a single processor machine. This technique was introduced to overcome the problem of underutilization of CPU and main memory. In simple words, it is the coordination of execution of various programs simultaneously on a single processor (CPU). The main objective of multiprogramming is to have at least some processes running at all times. It simply improves the utilization of the CPU as it organizes many jobs where the CPU always has one to execute. 
￼
/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/multiprogramming-systems.png


What do you mean by Sockets in OS?
The socket in OS is generally referred to as an endpoint for IPC (Interprocess Communication). Here, the endpoint is referred to as a combination of an IP address and port number.  Sockets are used to make it easy for software developers to create network-enabled programs. It also allows communication or exchange of information between two different processes on the same or different machines. It is mostly used in client-server-based systems. 

Types of Sockets  There are basically four types of sockets as given below:
* Stream Sockets
* Datagram Sockets
* Sequenced Packet Sockets
* Raw Sockets


Explain zombie process?
Zombie process, referred to as a defunct process, is basically a process that is terminated or completed but the whole process control block is not cleaned up from the main memory because it still has an entry in the process table to report to its parent process. It does not consume any of the resources and is dead, but it still exists. It also shows that resources are held by process and are not free.



What do you mean by cascading termination?
Cascading termination is a process termination in which if the parent process is exiting or terminating then the children process will also get terminated. It does not allow the child to continue processing as its parent process terminates. It is generally initiated by OS.





What is starvation and aging in OS?
When we use Priority Scheduling or Shortest Job First Scheduling, Starvation can happen, This algorithm is mostly used in CPU schedulers
Starvation: It is generally a problem that usually occurs when a process has not been able to get the required resources it needs for progress with its execution for a long period of time. In this condition, low priority processes get blocked and only high priority processes proceed towards completion because of which low priority processes suffer from lack of resources.   Aging: It is a technique that is used to overcome the situation or problem of starvation. It simply increases the priority of processes that wait in the system for resources for a long period of time. It is considered the best technique to resolve the problem of starvation as it adds an aging factor to the priority of each and every request by various processes for resources. It also ensures that low-level queue jobs or processes complete their execution. 




What do you mean by Semaphore in OS? Why is it used?
Semaphore is a synchronization mechanism that is used to control access to shared resources in multi-threaded or multi-process systems. It maintains a count of available resources and provides two atomic operations: wait() and signal(). It can have a count greater than one, allowing it to control access to a finite pool of resources.
Types of Semaphores
There are two main types of semaphores:
* Binary semaphore: A binary semaphore is a synchronization object that can only have two values: 0 and 1. It is used to signal the availability of a single resource, such as a shared memory location or a file.
* Counting semaphore: A counting semaphore is a synchronization object that can have a value greater than 1. It is used to control access to a finite number of resources, such as a pool of database connections or a limited number of threads.




What is Kernel and write its main functions?
The kernel is basically a computer program usually considered as a central component or module of OS. It is responsible for handling, managing, and controlling all operations of computer systems and hardware. Whenever the system starts, the kernel is loaded first and remains in the main memory. It also acts as an interface between user applications and hardware.
￼
Functions of Kernel:
* It is responsible for managing all computer resources such as CPU, memory, files, processes, etc.
* It facilitates or initiates the interaction between components of hardware and software.
* It manages RAM memory so that all running processes and programs can work effectively and efficiently.
* It also controls and manages all primary tasks of the OS as well as manages access and use of various peripherals connected to the computer.
* It schedules the work done by the CPU so that the work of each user is executed as efficiently as possible.


/Users/prathameshkondawale/Documents/my-projects/PortfolioWebApp/public/study-materials/software.png




What is SMP (Symmetric Multiprocessing)?
SMP is generally referred to as computer architecture in which the processing of programs is done by multiple processors that share a common OS and memory. SMP is very much required if you want to take advantage of multiprocessor hardware. It simply enables any processor to work on any of the tasks no matter where data or resources for that particular task are located in memory. These systems are more reliable than single-processor systems. 



What is Context Switching?
Context switching is basically a process of saving the context of one process and loading the context of another process. It is one of the cost-effective and time-saving measures executed by CPU the because it allows multiple processes to share a single CPU. Therefore, it is considered an important part of a modern OS. This technique is used by OS to switch a process from one state to another i.e., from running state to ready state. It also allows a single CPU to handle and control various different processes or threads without even the need for additional resources.




What is difference between Kernel and OS?
Kernel: Kernel is a system program that controls all programs running on the computer. The kernel is basically a bridge between the software and hardware of the system.  Operating System: Operating system is a system program that runs on the computer to provide an interface to the computer user so that they can easily operate on the computer.
￼


What is difference between process and thread?
Process: It is basically a program that is currently under execution by one or more threads. It is a very important part of the modern-day OS.  Thread: It is a path of execution that is composed of the program counter, thread id, stack, and set of registers within the process.
￼

What is a deadlock in OS? What are the necessary conditions for a deadlock?
Deadlock is generally a situation where a set of processes are blocked as each process is holding resources and waits to acquire resources held by another process. In this situation, two or more processes simply try to execute simultaneously and wait for each to finish their execution because they are dependent on each other. We can see a hand problem in our system whenever a deadlock occurs in a program. It is one of the common problems you can see in multiprocessing.   Necessary Conditions for Deadlock  There are basically four necessary conditions for deadlock as given below:
* Mutual Exclusion
* Hold and Wait
* No Pre-emption
* Circular Wait or Resource Wait



What do you mean by Belady’s Anomaly?
In the Operating System, process data is loaded in fixed-sized chunks and each chunk is referred to as a page. The processor loads these pages in the fixed-sized chunks of memory called frames. Belady’s Anomaly is a phenomenon in which if we increase the number of frames in memory, then the number of page faults also increases. It is generally experienced when we use FIFO (First in First out) page replacement algorithm. 




What is caching?
The cache is a smaller and faster memory that stores copies of the data from frequently used main memory locations. There are various different independent caches in a CPU, which store instructions and data. Cache memory is used to reduce the average time to access data from the Main memory. 


What is the functionality of an Assembler?
The Assembler is used to translate the program written in Assembly language into machine code. The source program is an input of an assembler that contains assembly language instructions. The output generated by the assembler is the object code or machine code understandable by the computer.




What are interrupts?
The interrupts are a signal emitted by hardware or software when a process or an event needs immediate attention. It alerts the processor to a high-priority process requiring interruption of the current working process. In I/O devices one of the bus control lines is dedicated to this purpose and is called the Interrupt Service Routine (ISR). 




Write about monolithic kernel?
Apart from microkernel, Monolithic Kernel is another classification of Kernel. Like microkernel, this one also manages system resources between application and hardware, but user services and kernel services are implemented under the same address space. It increases the size of the kernel, thus increasing the size of an operating system as well. This kernel provides CPU scheduling, memory management, file management, and other operating system functions through system calls. As both services are implemented under the same address space, this makes operating system execution faster.


What is PCB?
the process control block (PCB) is a block that is used to track the process’s execution status. A process control block (PCB) contains information about the process, i.e. registers, quantum, priority, etc. The process table is an array of PCBs, that means logically contains a PCB for all of the current processes in the system.



When is a system in a safe state?
The set of dispatchable processes is in a safe state if there exists at least one temporal order in which all processes can be run to completion without resulting in a deadlock.




What is race condition?

A race condition is an undesirable situation that occurs when a device or system attempts to perform two or more operations at the same time, but because of the nature of the device or system, the operations must be done in the proper sequence to be done correctly.




What is system calls?
In computing, a system call is a programmatic way in which a computer program requests a service from the kernel of the operating system it is executed on. A system call is a way for programs to interact with the operating system. A computer program makes a system call when it makes a request to the operating system’s kernel. System call provides the services of the operating system to the user programs via Application Program Interface(API). It provides an interface between a process and an operating system to allow user-level processes to request services of the operating system. System calls are the only entry points into the kernel system. All programs needing resources must use system calls. 




Difference Between User Mode and Kernel Mode
A computer operates either in user mode or kernel mode. The difference between User Mode and Kernel Mode is that user mode is the restricted mode in which the applications are running and kernel mode is the privileged mode which the computer enters when accessing hardware resources. The computer is switching between these two modes. Frequent context switching can slow down the speed but it is not possible to execute all processes in the kernel mode. That is because; if one process fails the whole operating system might fail.
		
User Mode: When a Program is booted up on an Operating system let’s say Windows, then it launches the program in user mode. When a user-mode program requests to run, a process and virtual address space (address space for that process) are created for it by Windows. User-mode programs are less privileged than user-mode applications and are not allowed to access the system resources directly. For instance, if an application under user mode wants to access system resources, it will have to first go through the Operating system kernel by using syscalls.  


Kernel Mode: The kernel is the core program on which all the other operating system components rely, it is used to access the hardware components and schedule which processes should run on a computer system and when, and it also manages the application software and hardware interaction. Hence it is the most privileged program, unlike other programs, it can directly interact with the hardware. When programs running under user mode need hardware access for example webcam, then first it has to go through the kernel by using a syscall, and to carry out these requests the CPU switches from user mode to kernel mode at the time of execution. After finally completing the execution of the process the CPU again switches back to the user mode.
￼




Static and Dynamic Loading
Loading a process into the main memory is done by a loader. There are two different types of loading :
* Static Loading: Static Loading is basically loading the entire program into a fixed address. It requires more memory space.
* Dynamic Loading: The entire program and all data of a process must be in physical memory for the process to execute. So, the size of a process is limited to the size of physical memory.





Logical and Physical Address Space
* Logical Address Space: An address generated by the CPU is known as a “Logical Address”. It is also known as a Virtual address . Logical address space can be defined as the size of the process. A logical address can be changed.
* Physical Address Space: An address seen by the memory unit (i.e the one loaded into the memory address register of the memory) is commonly known as a “Physical Address”. A Physical address  is also known as a Real address. The set of all physical addresses corresponding to these logical addresses is known as Physical address space. A physical address is computed by MMU. The run-time mapping from virtual to physical addresses is done by a hardware device Memory Management Unit(MMU). The physical address always remains constant.




Locality of reference
It is a phenomenon in which it tends to decrese the page falut in case of thrashing by loading more pages of the requiered pages into main memory.



Spooling in OS
Spooling is the temporary storage of data for usage and execution by a device, program, or system. Data is transmitted to and held in memory or other volatile storage until the software or computer asks for it to be executed. SPOOL stands for Simultaneous Peripheral Operations On-Line.







